#summary List of dependency packages for GData Java Client API library.
#labels Featured

= Introduction =

GData Java Client package depends on several third party libraries.  This page lists all the dependency packages.  

= Dependency Packages =
== Required ==
  * Java Development Kit version 5.0 or greater.  Latest version of JDK is available for download from http://java.sun.com.
  * [http://code.google.com/p/google-collections/ Google Collections] version 1.0 or higher.  This is included in the release package under "java/deps/google-collect-1.0-rc1.jar".
  * [http://ant.apache.org Apache ANT] version 1.7.0 or higher.  This is required only if you are rebuilding the Core API libraries.

== Optional ==
  * mail.jar in Sun's [http://java.sun.com/products/javamail Java Mail API] (version 1.4 or greater).  This is only required for APIs dependent on Media capabilities which include [http://code.google.com/apis/base/ Base Data API], [http://code.google.com/apis/documents/overview.html Document List Data API], [http://code.google.com/apis/picasaweb/overview.html Picasa Web Album API] and [http://code.google.com/apis/youtube/overview.html YouTube Data API].
  * activation.jar in Sun's [http://java.sun.com/products/javabeans/jaf Java Beans Activation Framework].  This is required only if using JDK version 1.5 or less and for Data APIs dependent on Media capabilities which include [http://code.google.com/apis/base/ Base Data API], [http://code.google.com/apis/documents/overview.html Document List Data API], [http://code.google.com/apis/picasaweb/overview.html Picasa Web Album API] and [http://code.google.com/apis/youtube/overview.html YouTube Data API]. 
  * servlet.jar in Sun's [http://java.sun.com/products/servlet Servlet API] (version 2.3 or greater).  This is required only for code samples 'sample.authsub' and 'sample.gbase.recipe' packages.