#summary The current release notes
#labels Featured

= Introduction =

The release notes show bugfixes and feature additions over the course of the project.
The wiki page shows the release notes for the current binary download, the subversion project contains a text version with the most recent changes.

= Details =

== 1.17.0 ==
  * Added support for [http://code.google.com/apis/health Google Health GData API].  This provides minimal interface to interact with Google Health Service.  This API does not include data model classes for CCR health records.
  * Added new error types in Google Apps API.

== 1.16.4 ==
  * Fixed compiled libraries in 1.16.3 to be compatible with Java 5.  No code change introduced in this release.

== 1.16.3 ==
  * Added support to enable Authentication to Proxy Service for hosted Google Apps.  See AuthSub for Web Application documentation for details http://code.google.com/apis/accounts/docs/AuthForWebApps.html.
  * Added support for RFC 822 text message encoding in Email Migration API.
  * Fixed issue related to handling YouTube video entries with empty description.

== 1.16.2 ==
  * Added write support including video upload feature in [http://code.google.com/apis/youtube/overview.html YouTube Data API].

== 1.16.1 ==
  * Fixed [http://code.google.com/apis/youtube/overview.html YouTube Data API] video feed parsing error related to unknown attribute 'favouriteCount'.

== 1.16.0 ==
  * Added Java client support for Google Contacts API.
  * Samples are packaged separately from source code.  With this change, there will be two packages, gdata-src.java.zip which contains the API source and gdata-samples.java.zip which contains samples and precompiled lib.

== 1.15.2 ==
  * Added support to upload image files using Document List Feed Data API.

== 1.15.1 ==
  * Added support for media feed in Google Base data API.  With the media feed support you can manage binary attachments to your Google Base items.  With this change you will require Java Mail and Java Activation Framework to use Google Base data API.

== 1.15.0 ==
  * Added Java client support for Google Apps Email Migration API.
  * Removed GData API documentation from the release package.  Online documentation is available at http://code.google.com/apis/gdata.

== 1.14.1 ==
  * Added batch support for Event Feed in Calendar Data API.
  * Added batch support for Cells Feed in Spreadsheet Data API.
  * Added support to handle foreign markup constraints as specified in RFC4287 sec 6.3 and AtomPub section 6.2.
  * Lowered visibility of log messages reporting on unrecognized foreign markup in xml feeds from INFO level to FINE level.

== 1.14.0 ==
  * Added support for [http://code.google.com/apis/youtube/overview.html YouTube Data API].
  * Refactored core GData code to remove dependency on, [http://java.sun.com/products/javamail JavaMail] and [http://java.sun.com/products/javabeans/jaf Java Activation Framework] for non-media services. With this change, only media dependent services such as, [http://code.google.com/apis/documents/overview.html Document List Data API], [http://code.google.com/apis/picasaweb/overview.html Picasa Web Album API] and [http://code.google.com/apis/youtube/overview.html YouTube Data API] require Java Mail and Java Activation Framework.
  * Simplified ant build configuration into multiple files.  This may require updates to your IDE settings to point to new ant targets.  For the list of available build targets refer to java/build.xml ant build file.

== 1.13.0 ==
  * Added support for Google Documents List Data API.
  * Added support for Calendar Gadgets in Calendar Data API.
  * Added samples for interacting with read/write calendar feeds in Calendar Data API.
  * Deprecated Geo format gd:geoPt from data model.

== 1.12.0 ==
  * Added support for standard Geo formats including GeoRSS, W3C Semantic Web IG and GML format.  The use of gd:geoPt is discouraged.
  * Updated GData Java client library versioning to follow the standard format "<major_release>.<minor_release>.<patch_release>". In this release the version number changed from "1.0.11" to "1.12.0" to reflect the updated versioning scheme.

== 1.0.11a ==
  * Fixed bug related to Calendar sample when retrieving ACL feed for public calendar.

== 1.0.11 ==
  * Added event publisher mashup sample that publishes list of events stored in a Google Spreadsheet to other Google services.  This sample shows how to retrieve the event data from Google Spreadsheet and publish those events to Google Calendar and Google Base.

== 1.0.10 ==
  * Added Java client support and extenstions for Google Calendar access control lists (ACLs).
  * Added Blogger GData API sample.
  * Changed inheritance hierarchy for CalendarEventFeed.  As a side effect, getEntries() method for Calendar event feed will return list of objects of type CalendarEventEntry instead of EventEntry.
  * Changed participant types for CalendarEventEntry.  As a side effect, getParticipants() method for Calendar event entry will return list of objects of type EventWho instead of Who.

== 1.0.9 ==
  * Added Java client support and extensions for GData Picasa Web Album API.
  * Added Java client support and extensions for GData Apps For Your Domain API.
  * Added "method" attribute to <gd:reminder>.  The "method" attribute can be used to specify notification method for Calendar event related reminders. The "method" value can be one of ALERT, EMAIL, SMS, ALL or NONE.
  * Introduced dependency on Sun's JavaMail API.  To use client package, download and install activation.jar, mail.jar libraries from Sun's JavaMail API package version 1.4 or later.

== 1.0.8 ==
  * Added Java client support and extensions for GData Google Base API.
  * Added Java client support and extensions for GData Notebook API.
